Add Fortran 101 notes (#27)
ACCESS-Community-Hub/decoding-om3: documentation/docs/pages/season2.md

## Regional boundary conditions
## Bulk formulae
## Fortran 101 - control structure, where parameters are defined, some keywords e.g. private, intent, submodule, use module etc

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Presenter: @edoyango (Edward Yang).

Date: 14/05/2026

```

> Contributing to MOM can be extra daunting if you're not used to programming in Fortran. These notes aim to introduce Fortran to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contributing to [MOM6](https://github.com/acCESS-nri/mom6) can be extra daunting if you're not used to programming in Fortran. These notes aim to introduce Fortran to
```

someone who might already be familiar with Python. And thankfully, most of the Fortran features exercised in MOM6 have a Python

> equivalent. Here, we won't be looking at MOM6 code directly, because the code itself is quite long - even if the language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
equivalent. Here, we won't be looking at MOM6 code directly, because the code itself is quite long -- even if the language
```

> features used aren't too complicated. Instead, we'll build a simple example program that uses some of the concepts that MOM6 is

Reviewer: >  Instead, we'll build a simple example program that uses some of the concepts that MOM6 is built with.

Can you please add a sentence that describes what the example will actually do. And then repeat the sentence or similar at the end when you show the example.

Author: done in below line

> built with.

Author: ```suggestion
built with. The program takes a 3d array (first two indices represent the lateral domain, and the last represents the columns), and performs either a sum or max operation along the column, reducing the result to a 2d array that represents the lateral domain only.
```

Reviewer: Ah, nice one! Would be a good one to put in an admonishment? (Feel free to just change things as you see fit -- unless you want more feedback.)

### Programs and modules

Most of the code in MOM6 is organised into "modules" which usually relate to a certain area of the ocean physics. For example,

> MOM_barotropic.F90 contains the barotropic solver code, and MOM_tracer.F90 contains the tracer advection code and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MOM_barotropic.F90` contains the [barotropic solver code](http://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/2026.01/src/core/MOM_barotropic.F90), and `MOM_tracer.F90` contains the tracer advection code and so on.
```

Reviewer: Where is MOM_tracer.F90? I found quite a few with similar names...
https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/tree/2026.01/src/tracer

Author: Should be `MOM_tracer_advect.F90` - sorry i was going off the top of my head!

```suggestion
`MOM_barotropic.F90` contains the [barotropic solver code](http://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/2026.01/src/core/MOM_barotropic.F90), and `MOM_tracer_advect.F90` contains the [tracer advection code](http://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/2026.01/src/tracer/MOM_tracer_advect.F90) and so on.
```

> Modules contains code that can be reused in other modules or "programs". Modules cannot be directly compiled and run, and so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modules contains code that can be reused in other modules or "programs". Modules cannot be directly compiled and run, and so a
```

Author: I've used the plural possessive apostrophe below so adding `a` wouldn't be grammatically correct.

modules' code must be "used" from a program. The skeleton of this arrangement can look like:

```fortran
module my_module ! my_module is the name of the module
  implicit none
end module my_module

program my_program ! my_program is the name of the program
  use my_module
  implicit none
end program my_program
```

The module and program's boundaries in the code are deliniated by `program/module` and `end program/module` couples. The

> program/module's name must follow the first `program/module` and and matching `end program/module` (the latter is optional, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
program/module's name must follow the first `program/module` and matching `end program/module` (the latter is optional, but
```

Reviewer: Slightly confused here on what is meant by:
> the latter is optional

You mean you don't need a `end program/module`?

Like the following would be okay fortran wise?

```fortran
module my_module ! my_module is the name of the module
  implicit none
end module my_module

program my_program ! my_program is the name of the program
  use my_module
  implicit none
```

Author: you're right - I wasn't clear. When I meant to say is that including the name of the module/program is optional. i.e. can be `end program` or `end program my_program` - both are valid.

```suggestion
program/module's name must follow the first `program/module` and matching `end program/module` (including the program/module name is optional, but
```

Reviewer: thanks for updating

> (including the program/module name is optional, but it's a requirement to include the name in modules in)

what does "modules in" mean?

> MOM6 follows this convention strictly).

Author: ```suggestion
it's a requirement to include the name in modules in).
```

`implicit none` is a "quirk" of Fortran. It says that all variables' type must be declared. Otherwise, the compiler can make an

> "educated guess" as to what the type it is, which can result in unexpected behaviour.

Reviewer: My impression is that it's best-practice to just include this?

Author: yes, that's correct.

```suggestion
"educated guess" as to what the type it is, which can result in unexpected behaviour. Hence, it is best practice to always include `implicit none` in every module and program.
```

### Subroutines and declaring variables

> 

Reviewer: Can you please add some text describing why subroutines are needed? Or at least why they are useful and we can't just use modules and programs.

Reviewer: Rather like functions I think?

Author: ```suggestion

Programs can have runnable code. But as your codebase gets larger, it's likely that you will 1. want to organise the code in some way to make it easier to understand and maintain (e.g. group code related to certain physics together), and 2. store code that is reused in multiple places. Subroutines help facilitate this. Subroutines are similar to Python functions except that subroutines don't return anything, and instead, they modify its arguments instead. Fortran does have functions also, but are used less frequently in MOM6.

```

> This is a trivial example as both the program or module does has no code. So let's create our first subroutine (Fortran comments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example above is trivial as both the program or module have no code. So let's create our first subroutine (Fortran comments
```
Is that what you meant?

are prefixed with `!`):

```fortran
module my_module

  implicit none

! says that subroutines/functions are declared after
contains

  ! this is declaring the subroutine's signature
  subroutine sum_along_column(is, ie, js, je, nz, arr1, arr2)

    ! each argument's type must be declared. Here we have:
    ! * type (integer/real)
    !   * real is equivalent to np.float32. However, MOM6 opts to control the precision at compile time.

>     ! * dimension aka shape. No dimenison means that variable is scalar. dimension(...) means the variable is an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ! * dimension aka shape. No dimension means that variable is scalar. dimension(...) means the variable is an array.
```

Oh right, when you say 

>dimension(...) means the variable is an array.

You mean that the elipses is replaced with the dimensions.

    !   * dimension(a:b) means that for the given index, only indices a to b are defined
    ! * intent
    !   * `in`: the variable will only be read
    !   * `out`: the variable will be written to
    !   * `inout`: not shown here, but means that the variable may be read and/or written to.
    ! once an argument has been declared, it can also be used to declare others
    integer,                           intent(in)  :: is, ie, js, je, nz
    real, dimension(is:ie, js:je, nz), intent(in)  :: arr1
    real, dimension(is:ie, js:je),     intent(out) :: arr2
    ! all local variables must also be declared
    integer :: i, j, k

    do j=js,je

>       ! copies can be done using array slicing

Reviewer: H'm in python these would just be pointers. I suspect that isn't the case here?

Author: yes that's correct. i didn't discuss pointers and addresses too deeply as it's meant to be introductory (plus it's not an explicit part of Python).

      arr2(:,j) = arr1(:,j,1) ! initialize the sum along columns
      ! MOM6 keeps nested loops on a single line, dilineated by colons.
      do k=2,nz ; do i=is,ie
        arr2(i,j) = arr2(i,j) + arr1(i,j,k) ! do the sum along columns
      enddo ; enddo
    enddo

  end subroutine sum_along_column

end module my_module
```

> Like programs and modules, subroutines are bounded by `subroutine <name>` and `end subroutine <name>`. The subroutine's

Reviewer: This paragraph is really handy. I think i'd personally find this section easier to follow if it went above the code block.

arguments follow the name, followed by the type declaration of the arguments and local variables. Unlike Python, the
types of all variables must be declared and cannot change. In the above example, the variable attributes commonly used
in MOM6 are shown (type, dimension, and intent). Variables can be declared in any order, but a common convention (that
MOM6 follows) is to declare the arguments first, followed by local variables.

Note that subroutines are invoked with `call <subroutine>(...)`

### Array copies

Like with Python NumPy, arrays' contents can be copied between each other. If the arrays are of the same shape, they can
be copied with specifying array indices (`a = b`), or you may specify which slices to copy e.g. `a(1:10) = b(1:10)`, or
`a(:, 1) = b(:)` etc. Noting that Fortran accesses array elements/slices using round brackets `()` instead of square

> brackets `[]` common in other languages. It is also worth noting that array assignments/copies are always deep copies

Reviewer: See my other comment. Would be worth saying what a deep copy is I think as some of the audience won't be familiar with the language.

Author: I'll remove the deep copy reference and just say that all the values are copied.

```suggestion
brackets `[]` common in other languages. It is also worth noting that array assignments/copies copies the array's values
```

(different from Python where `a = b` means something different from `a[:] = b[:]`).

### Loops

> 

Reviewer: Since we're doing an analogy to Python could be worth talking about Fortran order rather than C order (e.g. numpy's default)?

Author: I decided not to talk about loop ordering because it isn't crucial to get started with Fortran.

Loops are dilineated by `do variable=start,end,step` and `enddo` - which is like `for variable in range(start,end+1,step):`
in Python. The main difference between fortran loop ranges and Python ranges is that the `end` is included in the range.

> You may have also noticed that the loop ordering is a bit strange. This is quite common in MOM6!

Reviewer: Strange in what sense?

Author: ```suggestion
You may have also noticed that the loop ordering is a bit strange - where the outer loop iterates of the middle index, with the outer index in the middle, and the inner-most loop iterating over the first. This is quite common in MOM6!
```

### Derived types

> Derived types are similar to Python classes. The type has a name and attributes (or members). One of the key derived

Reviewer: > Derived types are similar to Python classes.

In the sense that they retain information once instantiated?

> Derived types are similar to Python classes. The type has a name and attributes (or members). One of the key derived

Author: ```suggestion
Derived types are similar to Python classes in that they can be instantiated and group related information. Like Python classes, Fortran derived types has a name and attributes (or members). One of the key derived
```

> types in MOM6 is the `grid_type` which describe the grid extents (including the computational and halo extents). It

Reviewer: Can I suggest adding a link?

Author: ```suggestion
types in MOM6 is the [`ocean_grid_type`](http://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6/blob/2026.01/src/core/MOM_grid_type.F90) which describe the grid extents (including the computational and halo extents). It
```

also stores other grid information like lateral dimensions of the columns, masking etc. We can create a simple version
of the grid type and use it in our subroutine:

```fortran
module my_module

  implicit none

>   ! grid type to hold grid bounds                     Python analogue:

Reviewer: _Really appreciate_ this "python analogue" example!

  type grid_type                                      ! class gridType:
    integer :: is, js   ! starting indices            !     def __init__(self, is, js, ie, je, nz):
    integer :: ie, je   ! ending indices              !         self.is = is ; self.js = js
    integer :: nz       ! number of vertical layers   !         self.ie = ie ; self.je = je
  end type grid_type                                  !         self.nz = nz

contains

  ! we can replace our grid indices with a grid_type
  subroutine sum_along_column(g, arr1, arr2)

>     ! We can still use the grid_type's members do define subsequent variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ! We can still use the grid_type's members to define subsequent variables
```
?

>     ! members are accessed with the % qualifier

Reviewer: I get confused about what the `%` thing is doing.

In python speak, one is instantiating a grid_type Class which we call `g`? We then access the classes attributes via a `%`? So the `%` is really a `.` in Python object speak?

In general, can I suggest adding key bits of take-home text in each sub-section using an admonishment, example: 
!!! tip
    Below, in python speak, one is instantiating a grid_type Class which we call `g`, we then access the classes attributes via a `%`? So the `%` is really a `.` in Python object parlance.

Author: addressed in below comment

>     ! members are accessed with the % qualifier

Author: ```suggestion
    ! below, `g` is an instance of the `grid_type`. This `g`'s members are being accessed with `%`, which in python would be `g.is`.
    ! `g`'s members are then used to size the input/output arrays.
```

    type(grid_type),                             intent(in)  :: g    ! g is an instance of grid_type
    real, dimension(g%is:g%ie, g%js:g%je, g%nz), intent(in)  :: arr1
    real, dimension(g%is:g%ie, g%js:g%je),       intent(out) :: arr2
    integer :: i, j, k

    do j=g%js,g%je
      arr2(:,j) = arr1(:,j,1) ! initialize the sum along columns
      do k=2,g%nz ; do i=g%is,g%ie
        arr2(i,j) = arr2(i,j) + arr1(i,j,k) ! do the sum along columns
      enddo ; enddo
    enddo

  end subroutine sum_along_column

end module my_module
```

Let's also introduce another pattern used in MOM6: the "control structure". Each module will have its own control

> structure that mostly stores information to control MOM6' behaviour e.g. which algorithm to use or whether a certain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structure that mostly stores information to control MOM6's behaviour e.g. which algorithm to use or whether a certain
```

> physics is turned on or not. In our simple example, the control structure will simply control whether to do a sum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
physics option is turned on or not. In our simple example, the control structure will simply control whether to do a sum
```

    real, dimension(g%is:g%ie, g%js:g%je, g%nz), intent(in)  :: arr1 !< input array
    real, dimension(g%is:g%ie, g%js:g%je),       intent(out) :: arr2 !< output array
    integer :: i, j, k ! loop indices

    do j=g%js,g%je
      arr2(:,j) = arr1(:,j,1) ! initialize the sum along columns
      do k=2,g%nz ; do i=g%is,g%ie
        arr2(i,j) = arr2(i,j) + arr1(i,j,k) ! do the sum along columns
      enddo ; enddo
    enddo

  end subroutine sum_along_column

  !< performs a max reduction along columns
  subroutine max_along_column(g, arr1, arr2)
    type(grid_type),                             intent(in)  :: g    !< grid type
    real, dimension(g%is:g%ie, g%js:g%je, g%nz), intent(in)  :: arr1 !< input array
    real, dimension(g%is:g%ie, g%js:g%je),       intent(out) :: arr2 !< output array
    integer :: i, j, k ! loop indices

    do j=g%js,g%je
      arr2(:,j) = arr1(:,j,1) ! initialize the sum along columns
      do k=2,g%nz ; do i=g%is,g%ie
        arr2(i,j) = max(arr2(i,j), arr1(i,j,k)) ! do the max along columns
      enddo ; enddo
    enddo

  end subroutine max_along_column

end module my_module
```

> The module is much larger now - the control structure type has been added and two subroutines have also been

Reviewer: Just a thought but I wonder if the Python analogy would be easier to follow with little signposts like this:
```suggestion
The module is much larger now - the control structure type has been added and two subroutines (python think: _functions_) have also been
```

Author: I won't include this suggestion since I relate subroutines to python functions further up.

added. `max_along_column` is almost identical to `sum_along_column` except that it does a `max` operation
instead of `+`. 

### If statements

In the module, we've also added a 3-branch if statement. If statements look quite similar to Python's except

> that the evaluation must be put it into brackets and is followe dy `then`: i.e. `if (statement) then`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the evaluation must be put it into brackets and is followe by `then`: i.e. `if (statement) then`.
```

Otherwise the semantics are identical.

### Module public and private

To hide details, MOM6 likes to leverage "public" and "private" statements in modules. MOM6 modules will
declare everything as `private` by default (by having an unqualified `private` clause), and then explicitly
list the objects that should be accessible outside of the module with `public :: list, of, objects, and, procedures`.
Private things are visible to other things within the module, but not outside.

### Documenting comments

> MOM6 uses Doxygen comments that automatically generate documentation for the code. These type of comments

Reviewer: Perhaps worth a link to their docs? E.g.
https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html
?

> MOM6 uses Doxygen comments that automatically generate documentation for the code. These type of comments

Author: ```suggestion
MOM6 uses [Doxygen comments](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html) that automatically generate documentation for the code. These type of comments
```

are sentineled with !< (as opposed to only !). Procedures (functions and subroutines), types and members, and
arguments must be documented.

### Using modules

> Let's finish our program and use the module code! The program will be very simple - uses hardcoded values to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's finish our program and use the module code! The program will be very simple -- uses hardcoded values to
```

initialize everything.

```fortran
program my_program
  ! specify which things we want from the module

>   ! Python analogue: from my_module import grid_type, control_structure_type, do_something_along_column

Reviewer: Love these "python analogue" statements!

>   ! note that because of the privacy in the module, if we tried to use sum_along_column, the program

Reviewer: Okay that's because of what you have declared as public right?

As in you have this:
> public :: grid_type, control_structure_type, do_something_along_column

But if it had
> public :: grid_type, control_structure_type, do_something_along_column, sum_along_column

Then it would be available right? Maybe worth adding the word "public" or similar to your summary?

>   ! would fail to compile.

Author: ```suggestion
  ! would fail to compile since `sum_along_column` hasn't been declared as public.
  ! Note that excluding `only` would lead to everything public being available. However, MOM6
  ! ensures to make imports explicit. This is, in general, good practice as it makes it easier to
  ! identify where something used inside the program/module comes from.
```

>   use my_module, only: grid_type, control_structure_type, do_something_along_column

Reviewer: what happens without the "only"? Is that a thing? 

Later you write:
> Near the top we use the module and select which things we want. This convention isn't mandatory, but is closely followed by MOM6.

Will it import everything public without it perhaps?

Author: > Will it import everything public without it perhaps?

that's correct. I've updated the comment above this line with that note.

"educated guess" as to what the type it is, which can result in unexpected behaviour. Hence, it is best practice to always include `implicit none` in every module and program.

### Subroutines and declaring variables

Programs can have runnable code. But as your codebase gets larger, it's likely that you will 1. want to organise the code in some way to make it easier to understand and maintain (e.g. group code related to certain physics together), and 2. store code that is reused in multiple places. Subroutines help facilitate this. Subroutines are similar to Python functions except that subroutines don't return anything, and instead, they modify its arguments instead. Fortran does have functions also, but are used less frequently in MOM6.

The example above is trivial as both the program or module have no code. So let's create our first subroutine (Fortran comments
are prefixed with `!`):

```fortran
module my_module

  implicit none

! says that subroutines/functions are declared after
contains

  ! this is declaring the subroutine's signature
  subroutine sum_along_column(is, ie, js, je, nz, arr1, arr2)

    ! each argument's type must be declared. Here we have:

>     ! * type (integer/real)

Reviewer 2: is it worth saying that integer is equivalent to `np.int32`?

Author: probably not - imo integer is self explanatory

Reviewer 2: Ah yeah not everyone uses int8

    !   * real is equivalent to np.float32. However, MOM6 opts to control the precision at compile time.
    ! * dimension aka shape. No dimension means that variable is scalar. dimension(...) means the variable is an array.
    !   * dimension(a:b) means that for the given index, only indices a to b are defined
    ! * intent

>     !   * `in`: the variable will only be read

Reviewer 2: here you can say that this is the equivalent of it being a `const` inside the subroutine

Author: const is a C/C++ thing and the primer i got from chris and adele is that the audience are probably python users.

advantages and disadvantages of each approach. Testing performance without having to worry too much about breaking MOM6. 

## Fortran 101 - control structure, where parameters are defined, some keywords e.g. private, intent, submodule, use module etc
Presenter: @edoyango (Edward Yang).

Date: 14/05/2026

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

!!! note

    Today we'll be building a simple Fortran example program that uses some of the
concepts that MOM6 is built with. Next week, we'll apply these ideas to some real MOM6 code. Our program today, takes a 3d array (first two indices represent the lateral domain, and the last represents the columns), and performs either a sum or max operation along the column, reducing the result to a 2d array that
represents the lateral domain only. To understand today's end goal, the final version of the code is given in Python below.

```

Contributing to [MOM6](https://github.com/acCESS-nri/mom6) can be extra daunting if you're not used to programming in Fortran. These
notes aim to introduce Fortran to someone who might already be familiar with Python. And thankfully, most of the Fortran features
exercised in MOM6 have a Python equivalent. Here, we won't be looking at MOM6 code directly, because the code itself is quite long

> -- even if the language features used aren't too complicated. Instead, we'll build a simple example program that uses some of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- even if the language features used aren't too complicated. 
```

> concepts that MOM6 is built with. The program takes a 3d array (first two indices represent the lateral domain, and the last

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> represents the columns), and performs either a sum or max operation along the column, reducing the result to a 2d array that

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> represents the lateral domain only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

<details><summary>Python equivalent of the example program to be built</summary>

```python
import numpy as np

> 

Reviewer: Can I suggest removing the excessive returns in this code block? And maybe adding a single line comment at the top about what the program is.. (e.g. `a python example utilising functions and classes that we will emulate in Fortran etc`)

Author: done

and so on. Modules contains code that can be reused in other modules or "programs". Modules cannot be directly compiled and run, and
so modules' code must be "used" from a program. The skeleton of this arrangement can look like:

```fortran
module my_module ! my_module is the name of the module
  implicit none
end module my_module

program my_program ! my_program is the name of the program
  use my_module
  implicit none
end program my_program
```

The module and program's boundaries in the code are deliniated by `program/module` and `end program/module` couples. The
program/module's name must follow the first `program/module` and matching `end program/module` (including the program/module name is
optional, but it's a requirement to include the name in modules in).

`implicit none` is a "quirk" of Fortran. It says that all variables' type must be declared. Otherwise, the compiler can make an
"educated guess" as to what the type it is, which can result in unexpected behaviour. Hence, it is best practice to always include
`implicit none` in every module and program.

### Subroutines and declaring variables

> Programs can have runnable code. But as your codebase gets larger, it's likely that you will 1. want to organise the code in some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Programs can have runnable code. But as your codebase gets larger, it's likely that you will:

 1. want to organise the code in some```

Reviewer: just to make mkdoc render correctly

Reviewer: (please check that I've done this right once committed and the preview updates)

> way to make it easier to understand and maintain (e.g. group code related to certain physics together), and 2. store code that is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
way to make it easier to understand and maintain (e.g. group code related to certain physics together), and 
 
2. store code that is
```

advantages and disadvantages of each approach. Testing performance without having to worry too much about breaking MOM6. 

## Fortran 101 - control structure, where parameters are defined, some keywords e.g. private, intent, submodule, use module etc
Presenter: @edoyango (Edward Yang).

Date: 14/05/2026

!!! note

> 

Reviewer: This is rendering funny, see:
https://decoding-access-om3--27.org.readthedocs.build/season2/#fortran-101-control-structure-where-parameters-are-defined-some-keywords-eg-private-intent-submodule-use-module-etc

I think it's the line breaks.

Author: looks like your suggestions fixed it

>     Today we'll be building a simple Fortran example program that uses some of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Today we'll be building a simple Fortran example program that uses some of the concepts that MOM6 is built with. Next week, we'll apply these ideas to some real MOM6 code. Our program today, takes a 3d array (first two indices represent the lateral domain, and the last represents the columns), and performs either a sum or max operation along the column, reducing the result to a 2d array that represents the lateral domain only. If you are comfortable with Python and would like to see today's end goal, the final version of the code is given in Python below.
```

I think this will fix it?

Reviewer: (also made a tiny tweak to the last sentence)

> concepts that MOM6 is built with. Next week, we'll apply these ideas to some real MOM6 code. Our program today, takes a 3d array (first two indices represent the lateral domain, and the last represents the columns), and performs either a sum or max operation along the column, reducing the result to a 2d array that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> represents the lateral domain only. To understand today's end goal, the final version of the code is given in Python below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
